---
layout: post
title: Lattice dynamics
date: 2024-05-01 23:36:10
description: From one-dimensional atomic chain to three-dimensional lattice
tags: theory
categories: study
typograms: true
---

## 1 Introduction

**Adiabatic Approximation**

Since the ions are much heavier than electrons, their motion can be treated separately. This is known as the adiabatic approximation.
(a) When treating electron motion, assume the nuclei are at equilibrium positions;
(b) The motion of the ions is determined by the potential field generated by the average motion of the electrons.

**Harmonic Approximation**

The total potential energy of a crystal is considered based on the interatomic potential. The shape of the potential energy $ U(\boldsymbol R) $ between a pair of atoms is complex. However, $ U(\boldsymbol R) $ can be expanded in a Taylor series around its minimum at $ \boldsymbol R_0 $ with small displacement $ \boldsymbol x = \boldsymbol R - \boldsymbol R_0 $:

$$
U=U(\boldsymbol R_0)+\left(\frac{\partial U}{\partial R}\right)_0\cdot \boldsymbol x+\frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{\partial^2 U}{\partial R^2}\right)_0\cdot x^2+... \tag{1}
$$

The first term is a constant and is not important for dynamical problems. The second term generates a force that must be balanced at equilibrium. Therefore, the first significant term in the above expansion is the quadratic term in displacement $ \boldsymbol x $. Considering only the quadratic term in Equation (2.1) is called the **harmonic approximation**.

In this approximation, the atoms in the crystal can be described as three-dimensional harmonic oscillators, and $(\partial^2 U/\partial R^2)_0$ term represents the interatomic force constant.

### 1.1 Phonon

In the theory of harmonic approximation, the $N$ atoms of a crystal are visualized as connected by harmonic springs, and the crystal dynamics are analyzed based on linear combinations of $3N$ normal vibrational modes.

Normal vibrational modes are represented by traveling waves of the form $ A\exp[\text i(\boldsymbol q\cdot\boldsymbol r − \omega t)] $, where $\boldsymbol q$ represents the direction of wave propagation, $ \omega $ is the angular frequency of the wave, and $A$ is the amplitude.

The energy of normal modes of a crystal is quantized: for the $\boldsymbol q$ mode, the energy is $(n_{\boldsymbol q} + 1/2)\hbar\omega(\boldsymbol q)$, where $n_{\boldsymbol q} = 0,1,2,...$.

Phonons are the quanta of vibrational energy in a crystal. The concept of phonons is analogous to that of photons, which are quanta of energy in an electromagnetic field.

Since the concept of phonons arises from relative motion of atoms rather than motion of the center of mass of atoms, phonons in a crystal do not carry momentum. However, for practical purposes, we assign momentum $\hbar\boldsymbol q$ to the $\boldsymbol q$ mode phonons. Thus, phonons are termed quasi-particles.

### 1.2 Description of Lattice Dynamics Problems

In the harmonic approximation, the lattice dynamics problem is to find the normal modes of a crystal. In other words, we attempt to compute the relationship between the non-interacting phonon energies (or frequencies) and their wave vectors $\boldsymbol q$. The relationship $\omega = \omega(\boldsymbol q)$ between $\omega$ and $\boldsymbol q$ is called the phonon dispersion.

To calculate phonon dispersion in a crystal, we need to know the interatomic force constants. This can be accomplished at two levels: semiclassical and phenomenological, or quantum mechanical and ab initio.

### 1.3 Phonon Statistics

Phonons in a crystal are in thermal equilibrium with each other at temperature $T$, and the average number of phonons for mode $\boldsymbol q$ (quasi-particles with zero spin) is given by the Bose-Einstein distribution function:

$$
\overline n_{\boldsymbol q}=\frac{1}{\exp(\hbar\omega(\boldsymbol q)/k_BT)-1} \tag{2}
$$

where $k_B$ is the Boltzmann constant. It's evident from this expression that at absolute zero, there are no phonons in the crystal.

At low temperatures $\hbar\omega\gg k_BT,~\overline n\sim\exp(-\hbar\omega/k_BT)$, the probability of phonon existence decreases exponentially.

At high temperatures $\hbar\omega\ll k_BT,~\overline n\sim\hbar\omega/k_BT$, the number of phonons increases linearly with temperature.

## 2 Lattice Dynamics of Linear Chain

### 2.1 Single-Atom Linear Chain

Consider a single-atom linear chain composed of $N$ atoms.

Assume it forms a closed chain, so the $(N+1)$th atom is the 1st atom. This is termed periodic boundary conditions, which avoid end effects in the dynamical problems of an infinitely long chain.

Consider only nearest-neighbor forces.

At a specific time, the $n$th atom in the chain has a displacement $u_n$ relative to its equilibrium position (Figure 2.2). Then, from Newton's second law and Hooke's law, the equation of motion for this atom is:

$$
m\frac{d^2u_n}{dt^2}=\Lambda[(u_{n+1}-u_n)+(u_{n-1}-u_n)] \tag{3}
$$

Here, $m$ is the mass of the atom, and $\Lambda$ is the nearest-neighbor force constant.

The solution is:

$$
u_n=A\exp[\text i(qx-\omega t)]=A\exp[\text i(qna-\omega t)] \tag{4}
$$

where $x = na$. Here, $A$ represents the amplitude of motion for the $n$th atom.

Note that there is only one allowed vibrational mode here—either longitudinal, where atoms vibrate along the chain, or transverse, where atoms vibrate perpendicular to the chain.

Discussing the longitudinal mode, substituting Equation (2.4) into Equation (2.3), we get the following dynamical equation (characteristic equation):

$$
\omega^2A=\frac{2\Lambda}{m}(1-\cos qa)A\equiv DA \tag{5}
$$

$D$ is called the dynamical matrix, here it's a (1×1) matrix. For $(A \ne 0)$, Equation (2.5) yields the dispersion relation for a single-atom linear chain:

$$
\omega=2\sqrt{\frac{\Lambda}{m}}|\sin qa/2| \tag{6}
$$

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/blog/LattDyn_1.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Figure 1 Single-Atom Linear Chain
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/blog/LattDyn_2.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true style="max-width: 50%; height: auto;" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Figure 2 Phonon Dispersion Curve for Single-Atom Linear Chain
</div>

(i) The dispersion curve exhibits translational symmetry in $q$-space: $\omega(q+G_n)=\omega(q)$, where $G_n=\pm 2n\pi/a$ is the magnitude of the reciprocal lattice vector corresponding to the chain.

(ii) $\omega(q)$ is a symmetric function between $q$ and $−q$.

For phonons characterized by frequency $\omega$ and wave vector $\boldsymbol q$, their phase velocity $\boldsymbol c_p$ is defined by $\omega = \boldsymbol q \cdot \boldsymbol c_p$.

For a group of phonons around frequency $\omega$, the group velocity is defined by $c_g = \nabla_q\omega$.

For the case of a linear chain, we obtain

$$
c_p=\frac{a\omega_{max}}{2}\left(\frac{\sin(qa/2)}{(qa/2)}\right) \tag{7}
$$

$$
c_g=\frac{a\omega_{max}}{2}\cos(qa/2) \tag{8}
$$

Here, $\omega_{max}=2\sqrt{\Lambda/m}$ is the maximum frequency of normal modes of the chain.

💡 Note:
(i) When $q=\pm\pi/a$, $c_g\to 0$. This means at the Brillouin zone boundary, lattice waves become standing waves.
(ii) In the long-wavelength limit ($qa \ll 1$), $c_p = c_g = v$ = speed of sound. The chain behaves like a continuum, and lattice waves become sound waves.

### 2.2 Two-Atom Linear Chain

Consider a long chain consisting of $2N$ atoms, with $N$ unit cells, each of length $2a$​, as shown in Figure 2.4. Suppose it is a closed chain, allowing for the application of periodic boundary conditions.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/blog/LattDyn_3.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true style="max-width: 50%; height: auto;" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Figure 3 Two-atom linear chain with alternating masses m and M.
</div>

Let the masses be $m$ and $M (m < M)$, and consider only nearest-neighbor forces. Furthermore, for simplicity, assume that both types of atoms have the same force constant.

Then, the equations of motion for the two types of atoms are given by:

$$
m\frac{d^2u_{2n}}{dt^2}=\Lambda[u'_{2n+1}+u'_{2n-1}-2u_{2n}] \tag{9}
$$

$$
M\frac{d^2u'_{2n+1}}{dt^2}=\Lambda[u_{2n+2}+u_{2n}-2u'_{2n+1}] \tag{10}
$$

The solutions are:

$$
u_{2n}=A_1\exp[\text i(2nqa-\omega t)] \tag{11}
$$

$$
u'_{2n+1}=A_2\exp\{\text i[(2n+1)qa-\omega t]\} \tag{12}
$$

Substituting equations (11) and (12) into equations (13) and (14), they become a coupled eigenvalue equation:

$$
-\omega^2mA_1=\Lambda[A_2e^{\text iqa}+A_2e^{-\text iqa}-2A_1] \tag{13}
$$

$$
-\omega^2MA_2=\Lambda[A_1e^{-\text iqa}+A_1e^{\text iqa}-2A_2] \tag{14}
$$

Combining equations (13) and (14), we get:

$$
\omega^2A_i=\sum_{j=1}^2D_{ij}A_j~~~i=1,2 \tag{15}
$$

where $D$ is the (2×2) dynamic matrix given by:

$$
D=\begin{pmatrix}
\frac{2\Lambda}{m} & -\frac{2\Lambda}{m}\cos qa \\
-\frac{2\Lambda}{m}\cos qa & \frac{2\Lambda}{m}
\end{pmatrix}
\tag{16}
$$

The solutions to equation (15) are:

$$
\omega^2=\Lambda\left(\frac{1}{m}+\frac{1}{M}\right)\pm\Lambda\left[\left(\frac{1}{m}+\frac{1}{M}\right)^2-\frac{4}{mM}\sin^2qa\right]^{1/2} \tag{17}
$$

The two branches of the phonon dispersion curve for the two-atom linear chain correspond to the two signs in equation (17).

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/blog/LattDyn_4.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true style="max-width: 50%; height: auto;" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Figure 4 Phonon dispersion curve of the two-atom linear chain.
</div>

## 3. Lattice Dynamics of Single-Atom Two-Dimensional Grids

We will consider two types of single-atom two-dimensional grids: square lattice and hexagonal lattice.

Consider the interaction between atom $0$ with displacement $\boldsymbol u_0$ and atom $n$ with displacement $\boldsymbol u_n$.

Let $\boldsymbol R_n$ be the vector from atom $0$ to atom $n$, and $\boldsymbol\varepsilon_n = \boldsymbol R_n/R_n$ be the unit vector parallel to $\boldsymbol R_n$. Atom $0$ experiences a central force from atom $n$ given by

$$
\boldsymbol F_n=\Lambda_n[\boldsymbol \varepsilon_n\cdot(\boldsymbol u_n-\boldsymbol u_0)]\boldsymbol\varepsilon_n \tag{18}
$$

where $\Lambda_n$ is the force constant between the two atoms. The equation of motion for atom $0$ is

$$
m\frac{d^2\boldsymbol u_0}{dt^2}=\sum_n\boldsymbol F_n \tag{19}
$$

where the sum over $n$ includes neighboring atoms under consideration.

### 3.1 Single-Atom Square Lattice

Figure 5 depicts a ball-and-spring model of the single-atom two-dimensional square lattice, where $m$ is the atomic mass, $a$ is the nearest-neighbor distance, $\Lambda_1$ is the nearest-neighbor force constant, and $\Lambda_2$ is the second-nearest-neighbor force constant.

The unit cell is determined by the primitive translation vectors $\boldsymbol a_1$ and $\boldsymbol a_2$​.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/blog/LattDyn_5.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true style="max-width: 50%; height: auto;" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Figure 5 Two-dimensional single-atom square ball and spring model.
</div>

According to equations (2.18) and (2.19), we can write the equation of motion for atom $0$ as

$$
m\frac{d^2\boldsymbol u_0}{dt^2}=\Lambda_1\sum_{n=1}^4(\boldsymbol u_n-\boldsymbol u_0)+ \Lambda_2\sum_{n=5}^8(\boldsymbol u_n-\boldsymbol u_0)\tag{20}
$$

Expressing the displacement vector of the $n$th atom as

$$
\boldsymbol u_n=\boldsymbol A\exp(\text i\boldsymbol R_n\cdot\boldsymbol q-\omega t) \tag{21}
$$

where $\boldsymbol A$ is the amplitude vector, $\boldsymbol q$ is the phonon wave vector. Note that $\boldsymbol R_n = (x_n, y_n)$, $\boldsymbol A = (A_x, A_y)$, and $\boldsymbol q = (q_x, q_y)$ are two-dimensional vectors.

Substituting equation (2.21) into equation (2.20), we obtain the matrix eigenvalue equation

$$
\omega^2A_\alpha=\sum_\beta D_{\alpha\beta}A_\beta,~~\alpha,\beta=x,y \tag{22}
$$

For a specific wave vector $\boldsymbol q$, phonon frequencies $\omega(\boldsymbol qs), s = 1, 2$ can be obtained by solving the following characteristic equation:

$$
|\boldsymbol D_{ij}-\boldsymbol\omega^2\boldsymbol\delta_{ij}|=0
$$

where the elements of the two-dimensional dynamic matrix $\boldsymbol D$ are given by

$$
D_{xx}=\frac{2}{m}[\Lambda_1(1-\cos q_xa)+\Lambda_2(1-\cos q_xa\cos q_ya)]\\
D_{xy}=\frac{2\Lambda_2}{m}\sin q_xa\sin q_ya\\
D_{yx}=D_{xy}\\
D_{yy}=\frac{2}{m}[\Lambda_1(1-\cos q_ya)+\Lambda_2(1-\cos q_xa\cos q_ya)] \tag{23}
$$

Phonon dispersion curves along the $\Delta$ and $\Sigma$​ symmetric directions in the Brillouin zone are plotted in Figure 2.8.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/blog/LattDyn_6.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true style="max-width: 50%; height: auto;" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Figure 6 Phonon dispersion curves of the single-atom square lattice.
</div>

**$\Delta$ Direction:** Choose $q_x = q$ and $q_y = 0$ such that $D_{xy} = D_{yx} = 0$. Then, the eigenvalues are
$$
\omega^2(\text{TA})=\frac{2}{m}\Lambda_2(1-\cos qa) \tag{24}
$$

$$
\omega^2(\text{LA})=\frac{2}{m}(\Lambda_1+\Lambda_2)(1-\cos qa) \tag{25}
$$

Normalized eigenvectors $ \boldsymbol e = \boldsymbol A/A $ are

$$
\boldsymbol e (\text{TA}) = (0,1)\\
\boldsymbol e (\text{LA}) = (1,0) \tag{26}
$$

**$\Sigma$ Direction:** Along $ q_x = q_y = q/\sqrt 2 $, the eigenvalues are
$$
\omega^2(\text{TA})=\frac{2}{m}\Lambda_1(1-\cos qa/\sqrt 2) \tag{27}
$$

$$
\omega^2(\text{LA})=\frac{2}{m}[\Lambda_1(1-\cos qa/\sqrt 2)+\Lambda_2(1-\cos \sqrt 2qa)] \tag{28}
$$

Normalized eigenvectors $\boldsymbol e = \boldsymbol A/A$ are

$$
\boldsymbol e (\text{TA}) = (-\frac{1}{\sqrt 2},\frac{1}{\sqrt 2})\\
\boldsymbol e (\text{LA}) = (\frac{1}{\sqrt 2},\frac{1}{\sqrt 2}) \tag{29}
$$
